<!DOCTYPE chapter PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
"http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd">
<chapter id="comp-intro">
 <?dbhtml dir="tutorials" ?>

 <title>Introduction to Components</title>

 <para>OpenLaszlo components are high-level objects that implement common user-interface functions.
  They range from relatively simple objects such as <literal>&lt;button&gt;</literal> to
  complex objects such as <literal>&lt;form&gt;</literal> and
  <literal>&lt;grid&gt;</literal>. </para>
 <para> Components supplied with the OpenLaszlo Server are called <emphasis>LZ
  components</emphasis>. </para>

 <section>
  <title>Overview</title>
  <para> This tutorial introduction is intended to show you the variety of OpenLaszlo components and
   demonstrate how to use their basic features. Later chapters explain how to use advanced features
   of components and how to create your own components. </para>
  <para> The simplest way to build an OpenLaszlo application is to use LZ components "out of the
   box" with their default behaviors. This chapter includes a few such examples. It also includes a
   few examples that use concepts that have not yet been introduced. Don't worry if you don't
   understand exactly how they work. The idea here is to get acquainted with the general "feel" of
   an OpenLaszlo application that is built mostly from components. The subsequent tutorials present
   the concepts you'll need in order to create your own applications. </para>

  <section>
   <title>A Sampler</title>
   <para> Before reading this chapter about how to use components to build an OpenLaszlo
    application, you should take a few moments to get familiar with the range of components that
    ship with OpenLaszlo. </para>
   <para> The example below shows a miscellaneous collection of components. It's an abbreviated
    version of the sampler in the <ulink url="../../../laszlo-explorer/index.html">OpenLaszlo
     Explorer,</ulink> which contains a visual tour of all the components. The code that implements
    these components may look a little intimidating if you have not worked with this kind of
    language before, but don't be put off. In fact you may not even want to look at the code yet.
    Your goal here is to start thinking about the kinds of things you can do in an OpenLaszlo
    application, and components provide your quickest route to productivity.</para>
   <para> The <ulink url="../../reference/">LZX Reference</ulink> documents all the tags, attributes
    and methods associated with each component. </para>
   <example role="live-example">
    <title>Components miscellany</title>
    <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/comp-intro-$1.lzx"/></textobject>
   </programlisting>
   </example>
  </section>
  <section>
   <title>Form Components and "General" Components</title>
   <para> You will notice that the OpenLaszlo Explorer groups components into "form components" and
    "general components." This is merely a heuristic grouping of those components that usually
    appear within a <literal>&lt;form&gt;</literal> tag and those that don't. There is no
    essential difference; for example, the <literal>&lt;button&gt;</literal> tag can be
    contained in a <literal>&lt;view&gt;</literal> or
    <literal>&lt;window&gt;</literal>; it does not have to be contained in a
     <literal>&lt;form&gt;</literal>. </para>

   <section>
    <title>When to Use the <literal>&lt;form&gt;</literal> Tag</title>
    <para> Depending on your background in building web applications, you may be inclined to use the
      <literal>&lt;form&gt;</literal> in place of the HTML
     <literal>&lt;form&gt;</literal> tag. This is often a mistake; OpenLaszlo applications
     are based on a different interaction model than HTML-based applications and overuse of the
      <literal>&lt;form&gt;</literal> tag results in LZX programs that fail to exploit
     OpenLaszlo's range of options. </para>
    <para> The <literal>&lt;form&gt;</literal> tag is, generally speaking, not a widely used
     tag in LZX applications. It is intended to be used in situations in which the client-server
     interaction is simple, and there is a 1:1 mapping between the returned server data and the form
     elements. When the server interaction is more complicated, more advanced databinding techniques
     should be used, as explained in later chapters. </para>

   </section>
  </section>
 </section>
 <section>
  <title>Building with Components</title>
  <para> In this section we'll explore the various ways to use components in OpenLaszlo
   applications: </para>
  <itemizedlist spacing="compact">
   <listitem>
    <para>using tags</para>
   </listitem>
   <listitem>
    <para>using script APIs</para>
   </listitem>
   <listitem>
    <para>using databinding</para>
   </listitem>
  </itemizedlist>
  <para> As mentioned above, the concepts of scripting and databinding are presented in later
   chapters. Don't worry if you're not completely comfortable with these topics. </para>

  <section>
   <title>Using Tags</title>
   <para> The simplest way to use the components is in an application that has tags only—no script.
    The following trivial example shows what this looks like. </para>

   <example role="live-example">
    <title>Components example-tags only</title>
    <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/comp-intro-$2.lzx"/></textobject>
       <parameter role="canvas">height: 100</parameter>       
   </programlisting>
   </example>

   <para> As a practical matter, you will usually need to use some script, whether in a method, or,
    less frequently, to create a component within a <literal>&lt;script&gt;</literal>
    element. </para>

  </section>
  <section>
   <title>Creating Components from Script API</title>
   <para> In addition to declaring components in tags, you can create and manipulate components from
    script. </para>
   <para> The following example shows how you can create buttons using tags and script. </para>

   <example role="live-example">
    <title>Creating components from script</title>
    <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/comp-intro-$3.lzx"/></textobject>
       <parameter role="canvas">height: 150</parameter>
   </programlisting>
   </example>
   <para> In the example below, the <literal>onclick</literal> method procedurally adds an item to
    the <literal>&lt;list &gt;</literal> component.</para>

   <example role="live-example">
    <title>Component APIs</title>
    <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/comp-intro-$4.lzx"/></textobject>
       <parameter role="canvas">height: 150</parameter>       
   </programlisting>
   </example>
  </section>
  <section>
   <title>Data-Driven Components</title>
   <para> A third way to create components is through databinding. In the example below, a new
    component <literal>textlistitem</literal> is created for each matching node in the "mydata"
    dataset. </para>

   <example role="live-example">
    <title>Data-Driven Components</title>
    <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/comp-intro-$5.lzx"/></textobject>
       <parameter role="canvas">height: 200, width:800</parameter>       
   </programlisting>
   </example>
  </section>
 </section>
</chapter>
