<!DOCTYPE chapter PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
"http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd">
<chapter id="scripting-tutorial">
   <?dbhtml dir="tutorials" ?>

   <title>Introduction to Scripting</title>

   <para/>
   <section>
      <title>Introduction</title>
      <para>LZX applications can include procedural code, (see <xref
            linkend="language-preliminaries"/>) as well as declarative XML tags. </para>
      <para> Within an LZX program, script can appear</para>
      <itemizedlist spacing="compact">
         <listitem>
            <para>between <literal>&lt;script&gt;</literal> tags</para>
         </listitem>
         <listitem>
            <para>between <literal>&lt;method&gt;</literal> tags</para>
         </listitem>
         <listitem>
            <para>between <literal>&lt;handler&gt;</literal> tags</para>
         </listitem>
         <listitem>
            <para>between quotation marks as an assigned value for an attribute</para>
         </listitem>
      </itemizedlist>

      <para/>
   </section>
   <section>
      <title>The &lt;script&gt; Tag</title>

      <para>The quickest way to get a script running is to put it in
         <literal>&lt;script&gt;</literal> tags. Code in script tags is executed
         immediately. <literal>&lt;script&gt;</literal> tags are only embeddable in the
            <literal>&lt;canvas&gt;</literal>. </para>


      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$1.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>


      <para>We can now use our knowledge of JavaScript to build on this foundation:</para>

      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$2.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>

      <para/>
      <section>
         <title>JavaScript Gotchas</title>
         <para> If you've never worked with JavaScript before, you may be surprised by some subtle
            features of the language. For example, consider this slight expansion of the preceding
            program:</para>


         <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$3.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>


         <para>Everything there is fine, except the "<literal>badtext.setAttribute( … );</literal>"
            line. Four plus three should be 7, as in the line immediately above it, right? What
            happened is that we concatenated numbers to strings (<literal>(..." is " + first +
               second)</literal>). The next line shows one way to fix this problem. The line after
            that shows a better way.</para>



      </section>
   </section>
   <section id="xmlinscript">
      <title>XML Characters in Script</title>

      <para>LZX programs are well-formed XML files. That means that all portions of the program,
         including embedded JavaScript, must conform to XML rules. Therefore where JavaScript uses
         characters that are meaningful to XML, such as the left angle bracket
         <literal>&lt;</literal>, you must make sure that those characters don't confuse the XML
         parser.</para>
      <section id="amplt">
         <title>Using <literal>&lt;</literal> and <literal>&amp;</literal> in Script</title>
         <para>XML has two <emphasis>reserved</emphasis> characters <literal>&lt;</literal> and
               <literal>&amp;</literal> which introduce, respectively, tags and entities. When
            you need to use either of these characters as data, rather than their reserved program
            usage, you must <emphasis>escape</emphasis> them by writing them as the entities
               <literal>&amp;lt;</literal> and <literal>&amp;amp;</literal>. (Some
            syntax-directed editors will work better if you also escape <literal>&gt;</literal>
            by writing <literal>&amp;gt;</literal>, but that is not required by XML.)</para>

         <para>The bodies of, for example <literal>&lt;method&gt;</literal>,
               <literal>&lt;setter&gt;</literal>, <literal>&lt;handler&gt;</literal>
            and the values of tag properties (for example,
            <literal>&lt;attribute&gt;</literal>'s <literal>name</literal>,
            <literal>type</literal>, <literal>value</literal> properties, etc.), are interpreted as
            Javascript by the compiler, but they must still be valid XML text. The most common error
            is to say something like:</para>

         <programlisting> &lt;method name=&quot;...&quot;&gt;
            if (a &lt; b &amp;&amp; ok) { ... }
    &lt;/method&gt;</programlisting>

         <para>This is invalid XML, but it is easy to do because <literal>&lt;</literal> and
               <literal>&amp;</literal> are so common in Javascript expressions. If there are
            only a few occurrences in your method body, you can escape them individually:</para>

         <programlisting>&lt;method name=&quot;...&quot;&gt;
            if (a &amp;lt; b &amp;amp;&amp;amp; ok) { ... }
    &lt;/method&gt;</programlisting>

         <para>but that sure makes your Javascript hard to read. Fortunately, has another method for
            specifying long stretches of text data that should not be parsed as XML: the
               <literal>CDATA</literal> directive. The alternative way to write your method is:</para>

         <programlisting>&lt;method name=&quot;...&quot;&gt;&lt;![CDATA[
            if (a &lt; b &amp;&amp; ok) { ... }
 ]]&gt;&lt;/method&gt;</programlisting>

         <para>This clearly demarcates your Javascript and you don't have to escape individual
            characters. As a rule of thumb, though, most programmers avoid using
            <literal>CDATA</literal> unless it is necessary.</para>
         <para> OpenLaszlo documentation is not intended to provide a complete reference for
            JavaScript. Later chapters do explain some advanced topics in scripting, but we
            recommend that you have a JavaScript reference handy while writing LZX. </para>
      </section>

      <section id="xmljscriptcomments">
         <title>XML and Javascript Comments</title>
         <para>Because XML and Javascript have two different comment syntaxes, you must take care to
            use the correct syntax in each situation:</para>

         <programlisting> &lt;!-- You can use XML syntax comment here --&gt;
         /* You usually can use Javascript comment syntax here, but it is HIGHLY discouraged */
         &lt;method name=&quot;...&quot;&gt;
            &lt;!-- You can use XML syntax comment here --&gt;
            /* You can also use Javascript comment syntax here */
            &lt;![CDATA[
     // You MUST use Javascript comment syntax here, an XML comment would look
     // like a funky Javascript expression &quot;lessthan, not, predecrement&quot;
     if (a &lt; b &amp;&amp; ok) { ... }
   ]]&gt;
 &lt;/method&gt;</programlisting>

         <para>There is one exception to the above, and the reason for highly discouraging using
            Javascript comment syntax outside of method bodies: If you declare a class to have an
            attribute named `text` of type `text`, this tells the compiler you want the body of
            instances of your class to be the initial value of the `text` attribute. For example,
            the button class does this so you can say: </para>
         <programlisting>&lt;button&gt;Click Me!&lt;/button&gt;</programlisting>

         <para>And "Click Me!" becomes the <literal>text</literal> of the button. The compiler
            treats this as if you had said:</para>

         <programlisting>&lt;button text=&quot;Click Me!&quot;/&gt;</programlisting>

         <para>The compiler will warn you if you say:</para>

         <programlisting>&lt;button text=&quot;One thing&quot;&gt;Another&lt;/button&gt;
</programlisting>
         <para>because it doesn't know which you mean to be the value of the <literal>text</literal>
            attribute.</para>

         <para>The gotcha is when you define the &lt;button&gt; class. If you say:</para>

         <programlisting>&lt;class name=&quot;button&quot;&gt;
               &lt;attribute name=&quot;text&quot; type=&quot;text&quot; value=&quot;Unnamed Button&quot;/&gt;
               
               // Javascript comment
               &lt;method name=&quot;...&quot;&gt;
                  ...
                  &lt;/method&gt;
            &lt;/class&gt;</programlisting>

         <para>The compiler sees the '// Javascript comment' as the body of the
            &lt;class&gt; and will issue a warning. It can't tell if you want the button
            text to be 'Unnamed Button' or '// Javascript comment'. It is for this reason that you
            are discouraged from using Javascript comments outside of
               <literal>&lt;method&gt;</literal>, <literal>&lt;setter&gt;</literal>
            and <literal>&lt;handler&gt;</literal> bodies.</para>
      </section>
   </section>
   <section>
      <title>Functions</title>
      <para>You can write functions in <literal>&lt;script&gt;</literal> tags.</para>


      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$7.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>


      <para>Functions are global to the LZX document, and they follow the same scope rules as
         JavaScript.</para>

      <para/>
   </section>
   <section id="tutorial-methods">
      <title>Methods</title>

      <para>Methods are in some ways similar to functions. They contain blocks of code between
            <literal>&lt;method&gt;</literal> tags, and are associated with particular
         classes.</para>

      <para>Let's explore methods with a simple example of a window. The
            <literal>&lt;window&gt;</literal> element is actually a view, as we saw before.
         There are a few methods that apply to it. The <literal>window</literal> class
            <emphasis>extends</emphasis> the <literal>lz.view</literal> class. This means that
         windows <emphasis>inherit</emphasis> all the attributes and methods of views.</para>

      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-5.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>

      <para>Let's break this statement apart:</para>

      <programlisting>    onclick="this.parent.setAttribute('title', 'You clicked it');"</programlisting>


      <para>First, there's the </para>

      <programlisting>    onclick=</programlisting>

      <para>Like all of the on[event] attributes, this one takes JavaScript that will be run in the
         context of the object when the event is received. </para>

      <para>The next part:</para>

      <programlisting>    this.parent</programlisting>

      <para>is a reference to an object. In JavaScript, the scope is generally global unless you say
         otherwise. That means that any class or instance methods or variables must be preceded by
         the keyword <literal>this</literal>. As for the 'parent' part: Let's start by saying that
         the lzx viewsystem always assigns each view a variable 'parent' which points to that view's
         hierarchical parent. View hierarchies are discussed in detail in <xref linkend="views"/>
      </para>

      <para>Now we're going to call a method. With very few exceptions, tags in an lzx file
         correspond to run-time objects of the view system. Using xml, we can configure those
         objects with attributes and child nodes. Using script, we can call their APIs. From the
         documentation, we know that the <literal>&lt;window&gt;</literal> has a
            <literal>setAttribute()</literal> method that will change the window title to whatever
         string you give it. </para>
      <para> The last thing to note is the use of single quotes inside the function call.</para>
      <para/>
      <section>
         <title>Using Script to Manipulate Attributes</title>

         <para>Remember that <literal>window</literal> extends the <literal>lz.view</literal> class.
            That means that each window has all the attributes of a
            <literal>&lt;view&gt;</literal>. Here's an example of how to use script to
            manipulate some of those assets.</para>
         <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$9.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>


         <para>We're just building on the previous example here. Instead of addressing the parent
            view of the button, we are going two up, then one down.
            <literal>this.parent.parent</literal> refers to the canvas, and we point to Window 2 by
            using its <literal>name</literal> (windowTwo).</para>

         <para>We are also using the <literal>setAttribute()</literal> method, which takes two
            arguments: the attribute to set, and what to set it to.</para>

         <para>Next, let's find a way to move Window 2 over so that we can see what's behind it,
            without dragging it. Clicking the button twice doesn't help, because all that does is
            reset the x attribute to a constant amount (150px).</para>

         <para>Instead, we need to figure out where the second window is, and then add an increment
            to it each time the button is clicked. To do that, use the . operator to get the
               <literal>x</literal> attribute: <literal>this.parent.parent.windowTwo.x</literal>.</para>

         <para>So we could say:</para>

         <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$10.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>

         <para>That works, but the code is getting pretty messy. It would be more elegant to encase
            all the code in a block and call it whenever the button is clicked…. To do what, we
            could write a function:</para>
         <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$11.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>

         <para>Notice how we use the "<literal>canvas.</literal>" syntax for pointing to the second
            window. We have to address the view <emphasis role="em">absolutely</emphasis>. The code
            is a lot easier to understand, because we can break it up over several lines, comment it
            and assign appropriately-named variables.</para>

         <para>However, the function is pretty detached from the button. A more elegant way of
            achieving the same result would be to write a method <emphasis role="em">of the
            button</emphasis>.</para>

         <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$12.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>

         <para>Since methods are not not global, we have to call them relatively. In the case of the
            button, we use <literal>this.moveWindow()</literal>. In theory we could have a second
            button that, when clicked, would call a method of the first button. The only difference
            would be the addressing. Before we go any further with methods, let's take a proper look
            at addressing:</para>


         <para/>
      </section>
   </section>
   <section>
      <title>Addressing</title>

      <para>In LZX, objects can have <literal>name</literal>s or <literal>id</literal>s or both by
         which they can be addressed. A <literal>name</literal> needs to be referred to locally, so
         there can be more than one view with the same name in a file (they just can't be siblings).
         An <literal>id</literal> is global, so there can't be two views with the same
         <literal>id</literal> in a LZX file.</para>

      <para>Going back to the idea of having one button call the second button's method:</para>

      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$13.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>

      <para>Both buttons now cause the window to move. However, it's confusing that one button
         points to a method in another button. Since windowTwo is doing the moving, why not make the
         method part of the window, and have both buttons point to that? Instead of addressing it
         with the whole <literal>this.parent…</literal> dot syntax, we can give it an
         <literal>id</literal>, and access it globally:</para>



      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$14.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>


      <para>Just to illustrate <literal>id</literal>s and <literal>name</literal>s, one button is
         addressing the window relatively using its <literal>name</literal>, and the other globally,
         using its <literal>id</literal>. Note that the <literal>id</literal> and
         <literal>name</literal> could have been the same; they were intentionally different in this
         example.</para>


      <para/>
   </section>
   <section>
      <title>Methods and Arguments</title>

      <para>In the previous example we have two buttons that do the same thing. Why not make them do
         different things? Move the box left and right, perhaps? We might write another method to
         move the box to the left, but it would be more elegant to use the same method for both
         directions. Just as with functions, we can pass arguments to methods.</para>

      <para>Here's one possible solution:</para>



      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$15.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>

      <para>We can pass more than one argument to a method, just as with a function:</para>


      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$16.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>


      <para/>
   </section>
   <!--<section>
      <title>Using attributes to reduce complexity</title>

      <para>Continuing from the same example as above, let's look at ways to reduce the number of
         arguments being passed. Here we put the functionality into the button itself:</para>

      <programlisting language="lzx">
   <textobject><textdata fileref="programs/scripting-tutorial-$17.lzx"/></textobject> 
   </programlisting>

      <para>The buttons have attributes which we have named "distance" and "direction". The values
         of those attributes need to be in <emphasis role="i">double quoted strings</emphasis>,
         because the value needs to be a JavaScript expression, not a string or a number. That's the
         reason for the <literal>value="''"</literal>. </para>
      <para> Alternatively we could give the <literal>&lt;attribute&gt;</literal> tag an
         attribute <literal>type="string"</literal>, as shown in the "right 2" button. In this case
         the word "right" does not need to be single-quoted.</para>

      <para>This example is actually more lengthy than the previous one, but it demonstrates the
         power of object oriented programming in LZX. If the number of attributes were to grow, and
         if various buttons had different attributes, the code would still remain very clear.</para>

      <para/>
   </section>-->
</chapter>
